To build a great building, we need to lay a strong foundation
Similarly, before we get enter into the cases of the game
let's begin with the basics first
"the chess board & the pieces"
Let's begin to examine the chess board in detail now
As you can see, we have 32 dark colour squares
and 32 white colour squares, making a total of 64
and we can also see there are horizontal lines
which we call them 'ranks'
and vertical lines, which we call them 'files'.
there are 8 ranks and 8 files,
ranks are marked '1 to 8' and the files are marked 'a to h'.
Now, we have covered ranks and files
let us explore the concept of diagonals.
the highlighted squares on the board
a1 to h8 & h1 to a8, these are called 'the diagonals'
As you can see the diagonals always run accross the white squares
or the dark squares.
Let us move to the topic of center
just like the capital city is the source of power for the nation
Similarly, with the chess board
the central squares are the most important squares.
whoever controls them has better control over the game.
the highlighted square e4, e5, d4, d5
these 4 squares we call as the center of the chess board.
when we develop the pieces, you must develop them
as close towards the center as possible
let us now go to the concepts of
kingside, queenside and the center
On the screen you see the files marked a, b & c are highlighted
and these are called 'the queenside files'
Now, let's move to the kingside files, these are the files marked
by the alphabets 'h, g & f' so these files are called 'the kingside files'
that leaves the 'e & d' files
these are the most important central files.
Now, we are going to understand
the correct way to setup a chess board.
No! that's not the right way.
Can you tell me why?
Yes, the right hand corner we have the dark colour square
this is not the right way to setup a chess board. Let's see again.
Yes, that's the right way to setup a chess board.
We always need to remember, that the bottom right hand square
should always be a white one.
Now that we've seen, how to setup a chess board
let's see how the chess board looks from white's perspective.
As you can see the 'h' file is to my right side
and 'a' file is to my left side
and the first rank is closer to me
and the eight rank is further away from me
this we need to keep in mind
when we setup a chess board
let's see what happen, when we turn the board around
Yeah! now we are looking at the board from black's perspective
as you can see, the 'a' file has move to my right side
and 'h' file has came to my left side
and this is how it's usually from black's view point
not only that, we can also see the 8th number rank
is close to me and the 1st number rank is towards my opponent side
Yea, let's now see how to name the squares using the co-ordinates
As we've seen earlier the files are marked 'a to h',
and the ranks are marked '1 t0 8'
let's move on the random square d4
let's see how it works
now we see a, b, c & d moving up all the way
1, 2, 3, 4
As we can see the two lines meet at point d4
So, that's how we find the squares
You need to be really good at identifying squares
based on the co-ordinates
beacuse we have to use that to write the
notation on the square sheet
it's time to get chess set out
because i'm going to ask you a few questions
Are you ready?
So point out to me the square c6!
Yes, that's right! As you can see the a, b, c and the numbers
1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 meet at this square so that makes it c6 square
now, quickly show me the square g7!
Yes! you got it. Very good
now we have covered everything we need to know
about the chess board, let's move to the chess pieces
the King, the most powerful piece in the game
as you can see there is a cross on the top of his head
the abbreviation of the king is K
it has infinite value, the most important piece in the board
the objective of the game is to checkmate the opponent's king
that also means we need to keep our king very safe
THE QUEEN, as you can see there is a crown on top of it's head
it's the second most powerful piece on the board
the abbreviation of queen is Q,
and it has 9 points
THE ROOK, its the third most powerful piece
after the king and the queen
the abbreviation for the rook is R,
and it's worth 5 points
The Knight or Horse, it is the 4th most powerful piece
after the king, queen and rook
The abbreviation for the knight is N,
and it's worth 3 points
THE BISHOP, it's equivalent to the knight's worth
the abbreviation is B, it's worth 3 points
now we come to the smallest unit, THE PAWN
it's worth 1 point, there are no abbreviations for this
now we have learnt about the chess board and the pieces
let's learn how to setup the pieces on the chess board
there you can see, the rooks occupy the corner squares
followed by the knights
and followed by the bishops
that's leaves us with two empty squares in the middle of the board
and that's where the king and queen are going to come
You need to be extremely careful where you plce the king & the queen
because many young children make mistakes here
the queen should always go to it's own colour
so it occupies the square d1
leaving the empty square e1 for the king
there you have the pieces on the 1st rank & the 2nd rank
is completely taken by the pawns
as we have seen we have arrange the pieces of white side
let's do the same for the black side
the rooks go the corner followed by the knights, the bishop
as usual the queen taken its own colour, so the black queen goes to d8
leaving the square e8 for the king
the pawns as usual occupy the 2nd rank from black's perspective
now that we have learnt how to arrange the pieces
let me ask you a few questions!
can you rearrange the pieces in their correct positions?
there you have it, very good
let's quickly go through, what we have learnt in this episode
In the next episode, we are going to learn how to move
the pieces & for the advance and the intermediate guys
don't worry, lots of more interesting stuff coming to your way